
# Types of keys
A **superkey** is a **set of attributes** that **uniquely** identifies **each tuple** of a relation.<br>
Because **superkey** values are **unique**, tuples with the **same** superkey value must also have the **same** **non-key** attribute values.<br>
That is, **non-key attributes** are functionally dependent on the **superkey**.<br>

A **trivial superkey** is the set of **all** attributes, because tuples in a relation are *by definition* **unique**.<br>

A **natural key** /ˈnætʃ.ər.əl/ is a **superkey** that consists of values from **real** domains.<br>

A **surrogate key** /ˈsʌr.ə.ɡət/ (**synthetic key**, **entity identifier**) is a unique identifier generated by the db or another software automatically.<br>

A **candidate key** (aka **potential key** /pəˈten.ʃəl/) is a **minimal superkey**, in other words it is a *superkey* that **can't** be reduced by removing an attribute.<br>
There can be **more** than **1** **candidate key** in relation.<br>

A **composite key** is a **candidate key** that consists of **two or more** attributes (table columns) that together **uniquely** identify an entity occurrence (table row).<br>

A **primary key** (**PK**) is a **candidate key** chosen to be **primary**. Usually it is **minimal candidate key**.<br>
An **alternate key** /ˈɒl.tə.neɪt/ is **any other** *candidate key* that is **not** **PK**.<br>

A **prime attribute** of a *relation* is a **column** that is a **member** of **any** *candidate key*.<br>
A **non-prime attribute** of a *relation* is an attribute that **isn't** a **prime attribute**, i.e., a **column** that does **not** occur in any *candidate key*.<br>

<br>

A **foreign key** creates a **referential integrity constraint**: **FK references to PK** of some table.<br>
A **referential integrity** /ˌref.əˈren.ʃəl/ enforces that *FKs* always point to **existing** **valid** *PK*.<br>

A **referencing table** (aka **subordinate table**, **child table**) is a table that contains **foreign key** (**FK**).<br>
A **referenced table** (aka **main table**, **parent table**) is a table that contains **PK** *to which FK refers* from other table.<br>
